The one thing I really couldn't get
purchase on from your essay is I never
got a sense of whether there were female
virtues at all from your piece.
>> If you want to know what I like about
women, [clears throat]
>> you can ask me. In fact, I invite you to
commission from me an entire essay on
the subject what I like about women
rates are very reasonable.
>> What do you like about women, Helen?
>> [music]
>> Men and women are really different.
But what do those differences [music]
mean? Should the right be trying to roll
back the entire feminist era? Or is
there a conservative feminism [music]
that can correct liberalism's mistakes?
My guests this week [music] are both
conservative writers, both critics of
feminism, both women who have very
different views of [music] what a
right-wing politics of gender should
look like. So, Helen Andrews, [music]
Leah Labresco, Sergeant, welcome to
Interesting Times.
>> Thank you. [laughter]
>> You're welcome. And uh I should note
this is the first time this show has had
more than one guest. So it's a radical
experiment for me as a host. So I make
no promises about how [clears throat] I
will handle the disagreements or
agreements to come. But you're both
here, I'm sorry to say, as theorists and
I'm going to ask
or we're going to try to debate your
theories. Helen, you recently wrote an
essay entitled The Great Feminization
that attracted some commentary on the
internet and argued, at least in my
gloss, that feminism has failed us
because it's made our institutions too
feminized, driving men and masculine
virtues out. [snorts] And Leah, you have
a new book called The Dignity of
Dependence where you suggest that
liberal feminism has failed us by
forcing women to suppress their nature
and fit into workplaces and social
systems made for men. [clears throat]
So those are two fairly distinct
critiques of feminism as it exists right
now. But before we dig into those
arguments, I want to start by asking a
really simple, basic, and easy question.
And I'll start with you, Helen.
What is the difference between men and
women?
>> I I I feel like I'm a Supreme Court
justice nominee. Uh well,
>> well, no, because the Supreme Court
justice nominee is allowed to not
answer, but I'm afraid
>> I don't have that privilege
>> that you don't have that privilege here.
>> Well, thank you. Um, I think that
question
starts us off backwards because in the
piece that I wrote about the great
feminization, I did not start from my
opinions about what the differences are
between men and women and then proceed
to speculate on how that might affect
our institutions. I started by observing
our institutions in all the ways that
they seem very clearly self-evidently
broken and not working the way that
they're supposed to in ways that you
could sum up in the word wokeness. Um,
so I think that there are some
generalizations that can be made about
tendencies that are male or female,
masculine virtues and vices and feminine
virtues and vices.
But those things are always a spectrum
and it's hard to get a grip on them. And
if I sat here and said women tend to be
more emotional while men tend to be more
intellectual, you could have five
perfectly valid objections to that right
off the bat. So I think I will restrict
myself to the uh judgment on on which I
am confident which is that the pathology
in our institutions known as wokeness
is distinctively
feminine and feminized and that in in a
very literal sense our institutions have
gone woke because there are more women
in them than there used to
What what is the nature the essential
nature of wokeness that you associate
with a certain kind of feminized
politics or feminized ways of relating
to other people, relating to colleagues
or co-workers or anything else.
>> Let's pick one flavor of wokeness and
that is the me too movement. It was not
just an increase in the volume of sex
scandals. There have been sex scandals
since the dawn of politics. And it was
not just that there were more of them
than there used to be. If it were simply
a matter of more women having the
self-confidence to speak up and
challenge their accusers, I don't think
anyone could possibly object to that.
But that's not what the MeToo movement
was. The Me Too movement was a change in
the rules of how sex scandals work.
There was a change in what kinds of
behavior were held up for censure. And
you had people like comedian Aziz Ansari
being cancelled for what was at the end
of the day just a bad date. And he was
guilty of not much more than severe
awkwardness. It suddenly became
mandatory for us to believe all women no
matter how credible or not credible
their testimony might be. uh it got to
the point where to even probe a woman's
story with various questions about the
facts of the of the case uh became an
affront and uh disrespectful to women.
So that to me is the essence of wokeness
that you see in all of its other
variations on campuses or in the
workplace. shutting down conversations,
intruding politics to spheres that had
previously been neutral um sort of
importantly neutral uh pillars of
civilization neutrality. Things like the
rule of law uh were suddenly subject to
politicization in a way that was really
really harmful. Um, so I don't know. I I
I don't want to say that we all know
what wokeness is, but that at least were
its important characteristics from my
perspective. The things about it that
worried me the most.
>> Okay,
I have more questions, but let's I want
to start, Leah, with a fairly direct
question because you are identifying
yourself in your book as a particular
kind of feminist. And I want to ask you
what is wrong with existing feminism,
liberal feminism, and how has it failed
women?
>> So I think the essential problem is that
there's a strain of feminism that sees
any difference between men and women as
a threat to our equality. You can see
this in a variety of ways, something
pretty small scale. There's uh, you
know, a lot of going back and forth on
the college level about where the
three-point line should be for men and
women's basketball. Should it be
equivalently hard for a man and woman to
hit the shot or should it be at exactly
the same spot so no one can say the
women aren't playing as hard? I don't
actually care that much about
basketball. I'll level with you. But I
think that anxiety that to draw two
lines on the court would in some way
imperil women's dignity is wrong-headed.
And you see it to have a real cost in
other domains where that attempt to
treat women like defective men who are
nearly identical, nearly swappable. And
when we can close that gap, no one will
be able to tell us we're less than
ultimately does a fundamental injustice
to women and it results in violence
towards babies because of course
pregnancy is the most obvious way women
differ or from men. It won't ever be
fully closed.
>> And a big part of your argument is that
the institutions of American life or
western life since the feminist
revolution have basically said to women,
yes, you can join up. You can, you know,
you can have the jobs you want, you can
have the equality you want, but we will
not accommodate ourselves to what you
just defined as the greatest female
distinctive, right? So, you have to in
effect become as men in order to enter
the professional classes.
>> And when you aren't, it's kind of a
personal hobby. You hear that language
of personal choice, not only on the left
with regard to abortion, but for
conservatives in opposition to things
like SNAP benefits for unmarried women.
Well, you chose to have this baby while
you were poor and everyone knows you
could have chosen differently when that
could entail not having sex or killing
the baby in the womb after the sex has
been had. So, there's a sense of the
baseline person does not have someone to
depend on in this way. I think pregnancy
is the starkkest example and it's the
gendered example. But the sense that the
the fundamental nature of the human
person is someone who isn't constrained
by someone else's need isn't just a
problem for women. It's a problem for
all of us because each of us has people
who depend on us even if we go through
our whole lives childless because we
have parents who increasingly are aging
without the supports to age all alone.
How do you distinguish between
dependence and weakness even though
everyone is dependent in some way? Part
of your argument is that by by necessity
women are a more dependent sex in some
ways. What distinguishes that from
saying women are just the weaker sex?
So, here's where I will push back on the
definition. Women are more directly
exposed to other people's need. But
historically, men also view their bodies
as something they extend over someone
else who needs them, not over a baby
through pregnancy, but by placing
themselves between an outside threat and
their family or their country. We live
in an unusually safe and prosperous
time. So, it's much less likely that you
will think I will take a wound to my
body for the sake of my family than that
your wife will. But so then it it is
fundamentally
issues about biology, family and
reproduction where you would say that
liberal feminism essentially asks women
to postpone, delay,
you know, things that are natural to
women. But so Helen
working off Leah's argument, you have a
conception uh of
essentially that there is a kind of
evolutionary story in which men evolved
to be warriors putting their bodies in
front of their families or their
communities, taking wounds and so on,
and that women evolved to be warriors.
Can you talk a little bit about that
distinction and where those phrases come
from?
>> Sure. Uh that phrase comes from uh a
psychologist called Joyce Beninsson who
did a book called Warriors and Warriors
and that is a book that I found very
enlightening because it was not about
the differences between individual men
and individual women. That's something
that there has been subject to a lot of
study that you know you give men and
women polls and they will give different
answers to your surveys. Her subject was
group dynamics. How do groups of men
interact versus how do groups of women
interact? And that seemed to me to
correspond very closely to the changes
that we would describe as wokeness. Her
uh theory is that this originated in the
midst of prehistory that men were
organized to have warrior bands, which
meant they needed to have hierarchical
structures. They needed to know how to
take orders and give orders and not take
it personally when uh their leader made
a choice that they didn't agree with and
that they needed to be able to engage in
conflict to fight and then when that
fight was over uh you needed to be able
to make peace and that women being more
oriented towards child rearing were more
likely to have protracted conflict with
their rivals within the tribe um and
less likely to reconcile at the end
there are similar insights that can be
gleaned from pimeatlogy.
Now, uh when you're talking about gender
differences, I think you need to
hold different kinds of expertise
as having varying levels of credibility.
But, uh I I think that the insights of
evolutionary biology or primatology are
are at least interesting fodder. I don't
know that if somebody gave me that book
and said, "Now speculate on what the
results of the feminization of
institutions will be," I don't know that
I would have um guessed that they would
be as dramatic as they have been. But
when I look at wokeness and say that it
has coincided almost exactly in time
with the demographic tipover of various
institutions from being majority male to
majority female. And if the changes of
wokeness resemble uh feminine behavior
as described by evolutionary biology,
then I think that maybe that makes
starts to make a lot of sense.
>> So Leah, are women the problem with
wokeness?
>> No, I don't think so. I think America is
a country of repeated religious revival
and this was one of them. It swept up
both men and women and came out of a
fundamental sense of, you know, what's
wrong with us? Right? the fundamental
question people are always asking what's
wrong with us and what can we do about
it I think wokeness was deeply
interested in questions about guilt but
had kind of thin answers for how guilt
can be expedated and where it's located
but I see this as less of a significant
deviation from other parts of American
history
>> let me ask you though about wokeness in
particular uh in the course of your own
argument you write a society that cannot
imagine placing the weak at its center
that forgets that society exists for the
weak will be drawn toward the manacayan
modes of cancel culture. Right? So
you're looking at the same phenomenon
that Helen is looking at and you're
saying well there's not enough respect
for dependence and weakness. Don't you
think that wokeness whether it is a sort
of feminized phenomenon or not is
certainly in its own self-conception a
mode of trying to get people to care
about the weak and I think this is where
we couple that first an orientation
towards the weak a preferential option
towards the poor with truth seeeking
right they do go together the weakness
of a baby is pretty incontrovertible the
moral status of a baby is where people
start to have a philosophical fight I
see a lot of the kind of frenzy of
wokeness around people of a sense of
could it be true that in a meaningful
sense I'm complicit in systems of evil.
This zeal for moral concern that's good.
Like the sense of how do I put things
right in a situation where I'm
constantly entangled with at least uh
partial cooperation with evil? That's a
good question. How do you put it right
is not primarily through self
flagagillation. It's through active
doing good. What about the aspect of
wokeness that says look we are going to
give special attention to people who are
disadvantaged who you know who who who
are sort of represent a tradition of
suffering or disadvantaged uh who come
from disadvantaged minorities or the
disadvantaged sex or gender as the case
may be right and essentially give them a
special leg up special deference in
debate and that's the place where Helen
immediately says this you've lost you've
lost truth seeeking and you know maybe
you've become too feminized but what
>> I wouldn't say difference in debate I
would say attentiveness to what kind of
policies are appropriate and here's
where I draw a big distinction between
two attempts to do a special justice to
the most disadvantaged students one of
which you know went very badly and one
of which is going very well the idea of
we don't have enough students of color
in our algebra classes in middle school
we've got this disperate impact let's
get rid of the algebra class in
California that's not ultimately rooted
in this sense of okay well what are we
doing and is it working versus the
schools that overhauled uh the
Mississippi miracle how they taught
phonics and how they got around a board
and they said we'll tell it's working
when the test scores improve not when we
hold a congratulatory press conference
where we say we're getting rid of the
way we were measuring a difference but
when we provide material support knowing
it may not work check roll back and what
I think is often missing and part of the
reason some of the excesses you're
describing describing turn up a lot in
the nonprofit and academic sector is the
sense of do you work in a domain where
there are tight feedback loops about
whether you're failing. It's normal to
fail when you do things and I think
that's what's missing in a lot of
domains of life that if I were going to
do one thing to say how can I make the
workforce feel more like the way Helen
wants it to it would be less about
adjusting the gender difference and more
about people having more experiences
starting in school where they do things
they can fail at.
>> I don't have any problem with that. I I
think learning through failure is great.
There's a lot of truth in that.
>> But so one of one of the dynamics here
and one of the, you know, sort of
obvious reactions to your essay is that
there are still plenty of men in
positions of power all over the United
States. But I think part of your
argument is that
men in those environments are
effectively
constrained by an expectation that I
think this might have been your language
that women are not allowed to fail,
>> right? Um, so to start off with the
empirical question of whether or not
feminization is true, whether it is a
fact about the world that we are living
in a more feminized society. I
understand people who say that, you
know, men still outnumber women among
CEOs, uh, and therefore that proves that
we don't live in a feminized society.
But I think that's just a failure to
understand how linear time works. I
mean, the fact that tenured professors
are still predominantly male because
these people got their PhDs back in the
1980s doesn't really tell you a whole
lot if you're in a field where 75% of
PhDs today currently go to women as is
the case in the profession of
psychology. So, it's correct that we
have not yet had a female president. On
the other hand, it's also true that the
White House staff was 60% female under
President Biden. So, does the one prove
definitively that we don't live in a
feminized society or does the other
prove that we do? I don't know. I think
these are all relevant facts, but sorry,
Leah, you
>> I I think you're right that, you know,
it's always the junior levels that are a
lot more female tilted and they're
moving gradually up. So, you expect that
trend to continue, but you know, then
there's the question of a generation of
boomers who have a real distrust of
themselves as authority figures with
something valuable to hand on. Um, and
that then you can see this sense of,
well, let's be led by our junior staff.
And I don't see that primarily as just,
oh well, the men forgot, you know, what
it was to be men. I think the men forgot
what they were doing or thought of
themselves as having something valuable
to pass on, men and women both in the
boomer generation. Where does that kind
of vacuum of authority and culture fit
into the story you're telling? I I would
never want to pass up an opportunity to
boomer bash. Um, but I'm not sure that
that's the story that's going on here.
Certainly, there were many institutions
and companies during the height of
wokeness that felt like they were held
hostage by their younger workers and
their younger workers were demanding
wokeness and the managers were too
terrified to do anything but capitulate.
Um, but I think
>> terrified of what exactly
>> and what what an apt question when you
look at somebody like James Dmore, the
Google guy who got fired for issuing a
memo saying that uh male over
representation in hard sciences might be
attributable to biological differences
and differences in interest. Um, he was
not fired because Googlers were calling
for his head and the management was
afraid of a staff revolt. He was fired
because any woman alleging gender
discrimination, any woman in his
division could then sue the company and
say, "I have not been given
opportunities because the atmosphere at
Google believes that women are less
capable than men. It was because of
legal liability." So that's that's where
I think a lot of the indignation at the
article I wrote puzzles me. But I think
it it's just because it comes from
people who are not aware of the way the
law is currently lopsided in favor of
punishing male vices and allowing
feminized vices totally free reign.
>> What are female and male vices? So there
was a landmark gender discrimination
case in the 1990s that involved a woman
who worked at a shipyard. The workforce
there was naturally 95%
male. And she claimed in her lawsuit
that she was not given the
opportunities, same opportunities as the
men, that she was made to feel
unwelcome. And one of the items of
evidence in this lawsuit that she
offered was that some of the male
mechanics had pin-ups on the walls of
their work areas and that these
half-clad women made her feel
uncomfortable. She was successful. The
court said yes, that is that is a
discriminatory aspect of the workplace.
The boss needs to tell him to take those
down. But that is not the only kind of
masculine conduct that has fallen a foul
of these kinds of lawsuits. Can we sit
with that example for just a second? I
read the case.
>> Sure, I would be happy to. Please.
>> What you're glossing as a pinup was
multiple photos of completely naked
women in closeup. The woman had, you
know, sexist graffiti and one of her
male co-workers thrust his leg in
between her legs. I don't think, you
know, is there a little bit of rowdiness
to men? Yes. But I think it's actually
unfair to men to sweep that kind of
pervasive nudity and specific sexist uh
language and physical grabbing as just
part of broad male vices that we need
more space for in the workforce. And I
don't think it's fair to characterize it
as she didn't like the pin-ups.
This is why I am establishing a spectrum
of masculine behavior and I am using
that case as my anchor out at one end as
the kind of behavior we can all agree.
Sure. Okay. Yes. by by all means that
should that should be grounds for a
lawsuit. Uh well, let me pose to you
another case that I think you will find
a lot more ambiguous. Uh there have been
several gender discrimination lawsuits
against Wall Street firms in the last 20
years, female traders and analysts who
say that the men at Morgan Stanley make
more money than they do. That the most
aggressive traders are given the best
clients and those tend to be men. and
that that is discrimination against
women. Now, some of the women in these
Wall Street cases can point to incidents
that we would describe as sexual
harassment, that some co-orker grabbed
them and kissed them after a drunken
work party. Okay, that's fine. But some
of these women uh cited as their
examples of testosterone fueled behavior
in the workplace push-up contests. She
said the the other traders on my team
had push-up contests and this was
discriminatory against me because that
was a form of team building that I was
not able to participate in. The real
problem with these laws is that most
masculine behavior falls into the gray
area of not clearly illegal but could be
cited by somebody if they filed a gender
discrimination lawsuit. So I think uh
managers take that information and they
think I can get in trouble for having a
toxically masculine workplace. I'm not
really ever going to get in trouble for
having a toxically feminine workplace.
So if there is ever
>> I am always going to heir on this side.
So for both of you, what what is
>> a tox what is toxic femininity?
[snorts]
>> If there are distinctive masculine
vices, I think we can concede
>> that there are there's a lot of talk
about toxic masculinity. It's a regular
subject of discussion. What are the
feminine vices? Oh,
>> in that story,
>> gossiping, inability to deal with
conflict directly, um, and uh, kind of
suppressing conflict uh, and aversion to
directness, which naturally in a
workplace is a big problem because, uh,
you need to be able to give direct
feedback to people, including negative
feedback. But how would you how would
you imagine a landscape where the
equivalent the the fairness you have in
mind, right, that you think is absent in
how men and women are treated, are you
going to have a man sue for, you know,
hostile work environment, complaining
that his female co-workers gossiped too
much or didn't argue with him enough,
>> or that I was reprimanded for giving
what I thought was really straight
clear, straightforward, clear feedback
to somebody that she then reported me to
HR and said I was being abusive. That
happens all the time. All the time. And
to be clear, I am advocating for fewer
lawsuits, not more. Uh I think probably
the best equilibrium is, you know, not
every workplace is going to be a good
fit for everybody. So why don't we have
some workplaces that are more masculine
inflicted and some that are more
feminine and will just not sue each
other over it at all? How about that for
a deal?
>> I think some of what you're describing
is not exclusively feminine, you know,
and it's strange to characterize it. so
strongly in that direction. It's a
product of human beings being bad at
group dynamics in a variety of ways that
men can fail at, women can fail at. And
it happens in maledominated places too
where they're explicitly doing truth
seeeking because it's very hard as a
discipline to value the truth more than
your own pride. We say sometimes that
pride can be, you know, I think a
masculine vice as well as a feminine
vice. And both men and women have
trouble loving the truth more than they
love their image of someone themselves
as someone who already knew it.
>> Is is that the primary thing that you
think is lost in institutions that
undergo what you're calling feminization
the failure to seek truth? I mean in
terms of the actual effects on society
at large, right? Not just you know
people in the break room, people dealing
with HR but all of society. You are
saying that institutions that have this
kind of conflict aversion
are less likely to just get to the
truth.
>> I think that's right. And I think that's
why the harms [snorts] or perils of
feminization have to be examined on a
case- by case basis for each institution
and discipline. I think something like
80% of veterinary students are women
today.
>> Are they doing a bad job at treating
their do you predict they are right? Uh,
as far as I know, this has not had
catastrophic effects. Uh, well,
actually, Claudia Golden, the Nobel
Prizewinning economist, notes in her
book that male veterinarians are more
likely to own their own practices,
whereas female veterinarians prefer not
to because being an owner involves more
financial risk and longer and less
flexible hours. So the shift from a
male-dominated profession to a female
dominated profession in the area of
veterinary medicine has led to
corporatization that we've gone from a
world where most veterinarians own their
own practices to one where most
veterinary practices are owned by
private equity which has not been
entirely without problems for the pets
and farm animals animals of America. But
I I am willing to state that
corporatization aside the feminization
of veterinary medicine has not led to
the collapse of society and is unlikely
to do so. I think it's basically fine.
>> What's the what's the protective element
there or what can be learned from
veterinary medicine to take into white
collar work? Right. It just seems odd
that you're describing this general
dynamic that women you you say would
undermine completely the rule of law uh
that we'll lose the rule of law in our
lifetimes when women become the majority
of lawyers. If it's that uh stark in
law, I'd expect if your claim is true,
some erosion in veterinary medicine or
pharmacy, which is also dominated by
women and where you can track the
failures cuz people die.
>> I would not expect to see a catastrophic
effect from fe feminization in
veterinary medicine. I don't know why
that why is that hard to see? Well, let
me let me maybe reframe it in a way that
will make a point that seems very
obvious to me clear to the people at
this table. Um, if there are more female
historians than male historians, uh,
that will have some effects on what gets
studied in history. You will have more
social history and feminist history and
a lot less military history and economic
history. Now, I'm willing to say that
that's sort of fine and then maybe the
old male-dominated history profession
did not enough social history. And we
can all probably agree that the correct
balance for the history profession is a
little bit of each. That's kind of a
neutral result of feminization. On the
other hand, the fact that certain areas
of inquiry are ruled out of bounds in
history now or in psychology now because
they are too controversial, that which
is what wokeness is, seems like a
genuine problem. That's not just
feminization has caused some changes.
Some of them are good and some of them
are bad and we all need to learn how to
live with the world being different. Now
that's a that's a bad thing because it
involves history or psychology not doing
what it is supposed to do which is
pursue the truth. Don't don't you think
though that there have been a lot of
moments and eras in history when
institutions have failed
catastrophically at the task of truth
seeeking and and this is I mean just
just in terms of the overall societal
consequences right the stakes of this
argument we're again we're not just
talking about you know sort of workplace
dynamics right we're talking about
academia [snorts]
failing to solve serious problems
journalists failing to report the the
whole truth about the world, right? Like
this is your critique of feminization. I
think it is a reasonable critique of
things that wokeness did. But you can
find plenty of historical case studies
where regimes, systems, forms of
government did all the kinds of things
that you're bemmoning under entirely
male-dominated conditions.
>> I I am baffled by people who think that
a litany of male failures is some kind
of rebuttal. Not Not to say that you're
making a bad point. I think you're
making a very sensible point. Tell me
I'm making a bad point. It's not a
litany of male failures. It's the kind
of male failures. Like if the stakes
here are feminized institutions don't
adequately seek truth. But it seems to
be that there are many situations where
institutions fail to seek truth under
male domination. Why are we assuming
that it is the female element in
particular?
>> One counter example of male failure and
male failure to seek truth that gets
thrown back at me a lot is the red
scare. How can you say that women are
the only people who ever do witch hunts?
Think about McCarthyism. And without
wanting to get too deep into the Joe
McCarthy did nothing wrong rabbit hole,
uh that that is not the point that I'm
making today, let me make instead a
different point, which is that I think
that McCarthyism was actually in many
ways quite masculine. Think about
loyalty oaths. The whole reason why
university systems and schools and other
institutions wanted to have loyalty
oaths which are sort of the banner uh
phenomenon of McCarthyism is because
they said we simply cannot have an
ongoing atmosphere of suspicion and
rumor and um sort of wishing. We need to
have some clarity. So we will have a
loyalty oath and everybody who takes it
will be fine and everybody who doesn't
take it will that'll be a problem but
they won't be fine. They won't be fine.
They won't they won't be done. Then it
will be finished and it will be all out
in the open and the criteria for
deciding whether or not somebody is a
communist will be known and we will
evaluate them in kind of a
straightforward objective way. So that
was in some ways a male witch hunt,
>> right? But it operated by masculine.
>> Are diversity statements the same kind
of thing? It's a loyalty oath about the
aims of the institution. It's a
masculine attempt to put uh an end to
feminine gossiping in the universities.
>> Yeah. I think the thing that offends a
lot of people about diversity
statements, especially for new
applicants to jobs, is that it's not a
clear ticking the box. Are you going are
you going to treat people fairly or not?
It's show me how much you care about
diversity. prove to me that you are
really on board with your by your
defense of the communist loyalty oaths.
If it were less of a discursive essay
and more of a signing a statement of
principles, you know, which some people
could sign and you possibly could not,
uh, that would feel like more of a
masculine policing of the bounds in
which a rough and tuml uh of academia
seeking truth within certain definitions
could flourish. Is that right? I think
the existence of a woke university that
wanted all of its faculty and
prospective faculty to sign on to some
kind of clear statement of principles.
Yeah. Okay. And maybe it would be one
that would be super DEI and I couldn't
sign it and but I would be I would be
okay with that. What I would not be okay
with is people intruding DEI statements
into for example the accredititation of
law schools. And to be a valid law
school in the United States, you have to
teach everyone DEI as part of their
legal ethics training. I think
accreditation is about are you a valid
law school or a valid university? And so
let's leave politics out of it
altogether.
>> Right? But the temptation to not leave
politics out of it altogether. Again, it
just seems to me to it may manifest in
some different ways in environments
where you have more women in leadership
positions versus more men, but there is
still a similar impulse to police speech
and debate. But let me I I want to pose
a question for for Leah rather than just
um just arguing with Helen. So the truth
seeeking question, right? So you think
you agree with Helen institutions should
be truth seeeking. Yes.
>> Right. Especially and medicine, law,
like the professions that have, I think,
been most feminized in terms of the
number of of women entering into them.
To what extent is truth seeeking in
those professions or other places
contingent on a certain degree of
intensive competition within those
institutions? And I think you can see
the follow-up question which is that the
the idea of care dependency
I think you could say almost necessarily
makes some institutions less less hyper
competitive right the New York Times has
incredibly generous I'm not just saying
this because my corporate overlords want
me to we have incredibly generous
maternity and paternity leave
>> uh and when I confronted after we had
our most recent child the incredibly
generous paternity leave package I was
like, well, if I take all of this, I'm
failing I'm going to fail as an
employee, right, in some way. I'm I'm
I'm going to become less competitive as
a newspaper columnist among other
newspaper columnist if I take this
amount of time off. Are there are there
professions that you look at and you're
like, honestly, you know, I don't think,
you know, I wouldn't want this
profession to be required to have this
amount of maternity leave because it
would cut into its competitive edge.
It's not it's not competitiveness that I
see as the main hindrance. Here's where
I would tell someone not to work if they
want a family. Uh which I think is doing
good work but in a method that doesn't
isn't compatible with family life and
isn't plausibly going to become
compatible. It's SpaceX uh which I
admire a lot which iterates very quickly
and for the whole beginning of its
company had such a tight runway that you
know each individual rocket meant
possibly the end of the company. There
are some things you can take on where
your responsibilities are so total that
they don't leave you room to say yes to
someone or something else. Monastic life
is also like this, but there are fewer
massive explosions hopefully. Um, but I
think those are rare and I think there's
a tendency for many employers to see
what a company like SpaceX can ask and
think, well, I'd kind of like that much
of my employees life, too, without
actually having a business model that
depends on it without doing anything
nearly as ambitious as they are.
>> Okay. But I want to push you on that
point. Right. So, we
>> we started out or I started out talking
about visions for how conservatives
engage with gender difference. And I
think a lot of conservatives listening
to your narrative might say, "Well, I
don't think it is just SpaceX, right? I
think there's a lot of zones in American
life, you know, from the tool factory
and the car dealership all the way up to
Elon Musk's landscape, right, where
there is a certain kind of ruthless
competitiveness that is important to the
truth seeeking that is the work of
capitalism, right? and that maybe there
is some room for being more solicitous
of female difference and dependency in
the workforce, but if you go too far,
you're just losing that edge. You're not
just, you know, it you can't sort of
segment it off and say if you work for
Elon Musk, you don't get maternity
leave, but everywhere else you do.
There's a larger culture here that is
endangered by
sort of making the workplace bend more
to dependence. I think part of it is
that you in any kind of work in any kind
of truth seeeking work you have to be
realistic about your materials that you
work with like SpaceX deeply rooted in
truth about its materials uh cares a lot
about exactly what can this steel take
what will happen to this particular part
of the heat shield but I think many
employers and workplaces are not
interested in the reality of the
materials of the human beings they work
with and there is something unjust about
building a system that chews people up
and then tosses them on the scrap heap
or chews up their fertile years
promising them egg freezing and ignoring
the fact that tends not to pan out. But
by the time that happens, they won't be
working there anymore and it'll be their
problem, not yours. Right? So, what does
it mean as a steward of your employees?
It means being realistic that people are
fragile. They have other people who
depend on them. They themselves can get
sick, injured, pregnant. and a
responsive workforce will have ways of
responding injustice to that.
>> Helen, what do you make of Leah's
vision? It seems like your
your argument in effect is that
corporate America and American
institutions are too solicitous of
female vices.
Is there a way that they could become
less solicitous of those vices but more
solicitous of the female distinctives
that Leah is championing?
>> No, I I think this is one area where
Leah and I probably really agree that
employers need to be solicitists of the
people who work for them and take care
of them. But there's a big problem with
doing that as things stand right now and
it is anti-discrimination law. A good
employer, if you've got a protege that
you care about and she's a woman, a
caring person is going to sit her down
and say, "I think if you want to have
kids, you should probably choose a
career track that allows you to shift to
part-time midway through so that you can
have children and not you should avoid a
career track that's kind of all or
nothing that's going to burn through and
and not allow for part-time work during
your childbearing years." Right now,
that conversation is illegal. I mean, it
happens all the time because of course
you'll naturally have that conversation
with people that you care about because
you want them to be happy. But if you
talk to a female subordinate that way
and have that conversation with her when
you don't have the same conversation
with men,
hopefully she won't sue you, but if she
decides to, you're in big trouble cuz
that's a problem. Um, so I think we
should make it more possible for
employers to have the kind of
conversation that I just just described.
Um, and the problem is that right now
it's the the constraints on frank
discussion that HR and these lawsuits
have created make those kinds of really
sensible conversations that you, Leah,
probably want employers to have
impossible.
This this gets to a larger a larger
question that I have for both of you,
which is that there is something about
the post-industrial economy
that
as far as I can tell, and this shows up
in multiple societies, it doesn't just
happen in the United States, right? it
seems to produce a lot of jobs uh that
women thrive in and it produces fewer
jobs that maybe let's say fulfill the
kind of warrior protector mode right and
this is these are crude stereotypes but
I think we can look around the economic
landscape and and see and see them
vindicated to some extent and I'm I'm
just a little bit skeptical therefore
that you know if you stripped away
certain aspects of anti-discrimination
law, right? Or if you, you know, you can
look at Europe. Europe offers lots and
lots of maternity benefits and all of
these things, right? And still in
Europe, you have, you know, lots and
lots of women choosing choosing career
over family, having fewer kids and so
on. Isn't there something about this
landscape that is just sort of a dynamic
interaction between the economy we have
and the choices people make? And it's
not it's not a structural conspiracy.
It's just sort of the world of the 21st
century
wants women in certain jobs.
>> I agree that the economy has fewer
though not no places for you know kind
of
uh founders with Brio um and a lot of
places to work a comfortable job um just
in the way that consolidation works. But
I think it's a mistake also to look at
work as the primary space to express the
warrior spirit. Um I think everyone
whether they have family or not should
not think about bringing their whole
self to work or being fully fulfilled at
work. You know if you are a young man
who has a boring entrylevel job where
you fill out forms, there's probably a
ceiling on how exciting that's going to
get for you. You should do something
interesting in your community like in
the same way an Eagle Scout would, but
now you've got to do it yourself. you
know, clean up an entire park, construct
an amphitheater for the local high
school. I think we make a mistake in
seeing the workplace as the primary
space we work out our cultural foibless
versus you're free to do good things in
the rest of your life. And in fact,
you're freer to take ownership of a
project that can fail and take risk on
outside the workplace, especially as a
young person. But don't but don't you
agree that to to some degree
you're suggesting that the workplace is
you know is not fitted for women in
certain profound ways. But women you
know in western culture have a myriad of
choices right before them relative to
the constraints imposed on both sexes in
the past. and they are choosing in large
numbers this ill-fitting from your
perspective choice like yes of course
absolutely you can have you know you can
have fulfillment and validation outside
the workforce nonetheless it is the case
that lots and lots of women graduate
college every year and enter willingly
into the system and the structure that
you're arguing is hostile to their
nature and biology to some degree not
not [laughter] completely right
>> what I was going to say is I think it's
hostile to yours too us because you're a
human being uh who will one day die. Uh
and what I claim is at the most basic is
that when we start our idea of the human
person as someone who's autonomous,
who's free to do things, who's
unconstrained by other people's needs,
women get caught first as being people,
not autonomous individuals. Men get
caught later.
>> Right. But it hits women first and
hardest.
>> Yes. And I think you see the cost not in
women not succeeding in the workplace
but in the continual delay and decrease
in number of marriages and pushing back
of childbearing
>> right
>> at a time when people say they want more
children than they're having and are
missing out.
>> But but women do also you can see this
in polling. There is a shift in
priorities where women especially in
polls in the last 20 years are more
likely to prioritize
work and less likely to prioritize
family. Right? So again they are sort of
accepting and embracing this structure
that you are arguing is illfitted for
them. Where where is that impulse coming
from?
>> Yeah. Where is my respect for revealed
preferences? Right. Yeah.
>> I think part of the issue is we have a
lot more scripts for how to succeed at
work than how to succeed at family life
and forming marriages. And we see people
forming marriages later with fewer kids
because they have fewer on-ramps. And
the on-ramps they have are bad, right?
the prevalence of pornography, the
increase in online dating with the
endless swiping and consumerism is bad.
So, you can say, well, look, like look
at people's revealed preferences. I put
an endless carousel of pornography and
profiles in front of them and I put a
relatively straightforward work path and
they're picking the work path. Do you
respect that? And my answer is, well,
let's try it again, but without those
things on the table.
Helen,
tell me tell me about what happens
in a world where you get the changes
that you want.
>> Yes. Such a such a world, right? Um, but
just spec specific specifically
in terms of how women enter the
workforce and how the workforce changes
as a result. Your argument in the piece
is basically that all of the downsides
of feminization that you describe can be
ameliated not by discriminating against
women or forcing them out of the
workforce but just by leveling the
balance and saying you know we we are
not going to have anti-discrimination
law enforced in this particular way that
you think is more hostile to masculine
vices than to female ones. I am
uncertain how things will shake out if
we take all of the thumbs off of the
scale. That is if we get rid of all of
the things that are structurally biased
towards women in the workplace right
now. Uh I I think some forms of
feminization are here to stay. I think
the female advantage on university
campuses, women earning more BAS than
men, that's it's been that way for a few
decades now. That is probably going to
continue to be the case. In fact, as I
as I understand it, it is men who
benefit from affirmative action in
university admissions because campuses
don't want to have uh too few men. Um so
that that uh but in other places, do do
I think that um corporate America will
be as feminized if we take the thumbs
off the scale? I predict not. Um I I
predict that the field of law uh will
probably not be as feminized. Yeah.
already even today I think 40% of women
who earn JDs are either working
part-time or out of the workforce 15
years after they get their degrees. So
there there are lots and lots of forces
of gravity um pulling against
feminization. Although uh to be clear
the the particular we we should always
be clearsighted about the problem that
we're trying to solve. Uh, and in this
case, the particular problem that I'm
worried about is wokeness. Um, because
the the reason why I think the great
feminization thesis is important to talk
about is because I see a lot of people
walking around right now thinking that
wokeness is over. They say the the vibe
shift is here. We don't need to worry
about it anymore. But I'm saying that if
it's the result of structural forces and
demographic feminization, then we cannot
be so complacent because wokeness is
here to stay. If that's the case,
>> the one thing I really couldn't get
purchase on from your essay is I got a
very clear sense of masculine vice and
masculine virtue. That masculine virtue
is about risk-taking, about, you know,
embracing chances, brotherhood,
fighting, making up um uh a comfort with
turbulence, right? And masculine vices
are about vulgarity, you know, uh
condescension towards women in some
sense, though. Um, and female vices are
about gossiping, backbiting,
irrationality,
uh, ostracism. I never got a sense of
whether there were female vice virtues
at all from your piece genuinely. And
that's why I'm asking.
>> I got a sense of balance for the men,
but not for the women.
>> I I saw that you you made that criticism
elsewhere. Uh, if
>> it's a question. It's only a criticism
depending on your answer. If you want to
know what I like about women, no
question, you can ask me. In fact, I
invite you to commission from me an
entire essay on the subject what I like
about women. Rates are very reasonable.
>> What do you like about women, Helen?
[gasps]
>> Uh, well, just to finish that particular
thought before I answer that question,
uh, I it's it's a little bit feminine,
honestly, to focus on my likes and
dislikes. I'm not asking about your
likes or dislikes. I write about myself.
I'm not about the world and I
>> I am telling you that when I look at the
world I do not see any institutions that
are currently suffering from an uh
excess or insufficient feminization.
>> Helen, I don't care about your likes and
dislikes because that's not what I found
compelling about your portrait of risk,
which we both value as a genuine virtue,
not a matter of preference like
chocolate or vanilla. Do you think there
are objective virtues for women in the
same way you think there are objective
primatlogy based vices for women?
>> It seemed to me just as a reader of the
essay I I felt like I was actually clear
on what Helen thought female virtues
were. I was less sure how those virtues
manifest themselves in public
institutions and the professions. So it
seemed to me that Helen, this is a point
of agreement between the two of you that
uh women for biological reasons are
oriented towards forms of care and love
and sort of communitarian spirit that
men are maybe not as good at. I was
interested in well what what do those
female virtues bring to a newspaper or a
corporation, right? Or are they virtues
that you know and again this would be
the trad
view would be yeah fe women have virtues
and they're best exercised in the home
to to say a word to Leah first you've
written several books and I'm sure
you've read reviews of those books
hopefully as fellow authors we can agree
that it is unfair when book reviewers
criticize you for not writing the book
they would have written so it's possible
that I didn't write the essay you would
have written. I just wanted some
information that was curious to you, but
I didn't think that was the assignment
and I think you should take the essay on
its own [clears throat] terms.
>> I'm asking you as a thinker, as a
thinker I respect um about what virtues
you see in women.
>> I they were apparently clear to Ross
because I think the answer he just gave
about care was pretty close to the mark.
>> Well, then let me let me take the the
moderator's prerogative and say again,
repeat my question. How because and and
I will elaborate it on it further and
then you can answer. It seems to me we
can take for granted that many many
workplaces in the future will be mixed
between men and women. Um that this is
sort of a fundamental feature of 21st
century life that is not going away.
If you don't want those work workplaces
and those institutions
dominated by female vices, what is the
positive sum interaction between male
virtues and female virtues that you
would like to see at, you know, in at
the Supreme Court or the New York Times
or anywhere else?
Uh, I think that if you had asked me 10
years ago to guess what the effects of
the feminization of the legal field
would be, I probably would have given
the same answer that a feminist would
have given. The same answer you can find
in Dalia Lithwick's book about the
feminization of the law. That it's going
to be more uh accommodating of gray
areas. It's going to be less doctrinire,
less huing to the letters on the page
and more looking at more more attentive
to context. Um, and I think if you had
asked me to guess how that would play
out, I would have said, you know what,
that's that's maybe not necessarily such
a terrible thing. Maybe we should be
more oriented towards rehabilitation
rather than punishment. Maybe the
feminization of the law is not entirely
without benefits. Uh, and I think it's
possible that that is accurate, that
that is a reflection of how the
feminization of law has played out in
practice. The reason why I am turning on
a big red siren when it comes to the
feminization of the law is that all of
those things that sounded so nice in
theory or in the abstract in in practice
look like the Title 9 kangaroo courts
for sexual assault on college campuses.
If that is what the feminization of the
law looks like in practice, I think
that's horrible. And if an increasingly
feminized legal profession is going to
take the problems of those Title 9
courts and bring them into grown-up law,
I think that is an that is an emergency
level danger that we all need to be
really really worried about.
But so the the positive side here is
that you could imagine a dynamic
interaction between a doctrinire male
sensibility
and a female sensibility attuned to
nuance and gray area that in a kind of
yin and yang model interacted
successfully to correct the weaknesses
of a purely doctrinire vision of the law
without sliding. heading all the way
into a motive driven kangaroo chords.
I'm just putting words in your mouth,
but I'm I'm I'm looking I'm looking for
the positive sum dynamic because just as
liberals and conservatives are stuck
with each other in America, so too are
men and women, right? So that's what
we're looking for.
>> Mhm. Yeah. And I think you can see
imagine the same kind of thing to jump
to another institution in academia,
right? Academia is extremely feminized
today and it's not a coincidence that
college campuses are capitals of
wokeness. Uh so I I think probably it's
unlikely that college faculty are going
to be defeminized anytime soon. But I
think we can achieve helpful compromise
and the yin-yang dynamic uh that you
describe by reinstituting certain guard
rails to guard against um female vices.
strong statements of academic freedom
that we can start there if we're if
we're thinking of concrete steps we can
take tomorrow to make sure that uh men
and women on university faculty are able
to work together more productively.
>> I still haven't heard a full account of
female virtue. I heard you voice it uh
for Helen. Um and I'll be honest, I
don't think in terms of primarily
feminine and masculine virtues as a kind
of fractional complimentarity. All men
and women are called to faith, hope, and
charity. They're all called to
fortitude. The particular kind of
fortitude asked of a man or a woman may
change based on their state in life. But
I would have trouble raising my two
daughters and my son uh to know how to
be good versus how to reduce their harm
working solely from this definition of
what it means to be a man or a woman.
One of the larger stories of our world
is we've referenced it a couple times,
but we're in a society where men and
women are not interacting successfully.
I think um they're more the genders are
more politically polarized than at any
point in modern history. Possibly
related to that is the declining
marriage and birth rates all across the
developed world. You don't want to push
that point too far, but there is some
failure for the sexes to come together.
Um, so two
two questions that are maybe nested
together. Um, in each of your visions of
sort of workplaces and cultures
transformed,
do you think that
the modern workplace
can help
men and women interact
more successfully?
Right? Or is there a way in which gender
differences require maybe a little bit
more separation in some spheres? Like
which which is a better scenario?
Figuring out the best way for men and
women to work together at work or having
Yeah. more distinctively male and female
workplaces and then men and women sort
of rejoin in the romantic or domestic
sphere.
How's that for a question?
>> Yeah. Uh I don't really have an answer
to that one. I think it is probably
likely uh just as a matter of prediction
that you will get more workplaces that
are predominantly male or predominantly
female um in the in the future I
envision where there's no longer thumbs
on the scale. Whether that will be good
for men and women interaction
interacting, I don't really know. I
don't think I have an opinion.
>> I have opinions. Uh I I don't think the
workforce is the main way I see men and
women coming apart and it's not even
with some movements in Helen or my
directions the main place I see them
coming together. Uh I want to make a
pitch especially since we've talked a
lot about women uh good bad medium uh I
want to make a pitch for what's good
about men here in particular and where
the goodness of men is particularly
neglected um and how that could help men
and women come back together. I think
part of the appeal of the warrior band
or of a marriage is a either a group or
pair of people taking on something too
large for either to sustain by themsel
and developing trust because they bear a
responsibility they know their own
strength cannot serve. As a married
woman, I've loved my husband the whole
time, but being pregnant meant depending
on him in a way that was different than
any other part of our marriage. And I
think the later marriages and the rarer
it is, the less often men who are on
average stronger find a reason their
strength is required. Um, and I think
the more that both in a community, you
know, starting with young men, there's a
real sense of because you are larger and
stronger, like we need something from
you to make this whole community run and
that will continue through your
marriage. Um, the easier it is to make
the case for men and women to come
together. How on earth could we have
three kids except that we trust each
other and eb and flow in strength and
can do more than we can by ourselves?
>> All right, Leah Labresco, Sergeant Helen
Andrews, thank you so much for joining
me.
>> Thank you for having me on.